Sdg23 add contribute page (#446)
MDAnalysis/MDAnalysis.github.io: pages/contribute.md

---
layout: page
title: Contribute
order: 6
---

MDAnalysis is an open-source project that welcomes and encourages contributions from the community. Whether you're a developer, documentation writer, or interested in improving the website, there are many ways to get involved.

> You can contribute by **developing new features, fixing bugs, improving documentation, enhancing tutorials, contributing to MDAKits, improving the website, or engaging in discussions**. Contributions also extend to our **mentoring and outreach programs**, where participants gain hands-on experience in open-source development and scientific software.

Reviewer: @jennaswa  suggested adding 'contributing by mentoring' too.

### How to Get Started
- Work on the [User Guide Repository]({{ site.docs.userguide.repo }}).
- Follow the [Contributing to the User Guide]({{ site.docs.userguide.url }}/stable/contributing_docs.html).
- Check for open documentation-related issues in the [User Guide GitHub Issues]({{ site.docs.userguide.issues }}).

### API Reference
The [API reference]({{ site.docs.mdanalysis.url }}/stable/index.html) is **automatically generated** from *docstrings* in the codebase. It provides a structured reference for developers working with MDAnalysis. You can contribute by improving *docstrings* for functions, classes, and modules or updating outdated documentation.

To get started:
- Work on the [MDAnalysis Main Code Repository]({{ site.github.repo }}).
- Follow the [API Documentation Contribution Guide]({{ site.docs.userguide.url }}/stable/contributing_code.html#working-with-mdanalysis-docs).
- Browse open API documentation issues in [GitHub Issues]({{ site.github.issues }}).

## Mentoring & Outreach Programs

> MDAnalysis actively participates in various mentoring and outreach programs **to help students, researchers, and early-career contributors gain experience in open-source development and scientific software**. Through these programs, participants receive mentorship, contribute to real-world projects, and develop valuable skills in computational science and software engineering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MDAnalysis has actively participated in various mentoring and outreach programs **to help students, researchers, and early-career contributors gain experience in open-source development and scientific software**. Through these programs, participants receive mentorship, contribute to real-world projects, and develop valuable skills in computational science and software engineering.
```

Reviewer: changing this to past tense - as for this year at least we are not taking on any other commitments

- **[CompChemURG](https://www.bindingsites.co.uk/home)**  \
    A mentoring initiative focused on computational chemistry, supporting undergraduates and early-career researchers in gaining expertise in the field.

Many of our [core developers][] started through these programs &mdash; consider joining and becoming part of the MDAnalysis community!

### Upcoming Opportunities

Applications for [Google Summer of Code 2025][] are open! If you're interested in participating, check out our project ideas and application guidelines.

For additional updates on upcoming events, visit our [Community]({{ site.baseurl }}/pages/community/) page.

### Past GSoC

MDAnalysis has participated in Google Summer of Code for several years, mentoring students on a variety of open-source projects. Explore our past projects:

- [GSoC 2024][] 
- [GSoC 2023][] 
- [GSoC 2022][] 

## Other Contributions

If you are interested in contributing in other ways, such as improving the website or blog, you can refer to the [README file][] in the [Website Repository][]. While the website is already maintained by the MDAnalysis team, minor fixes and updates are always welcome. 

> If you'd like to write a **blog post**, feel free to reach out via the [Community]({{ site.baseurl }}/pages/community/) page.

Reviewer: @jennaswa  a blog post about what? 
I suggest rephrasing to be more explicit. 'documenting your experience of learning MDAnalysis' or 'to tell us about your involvement in a UGM' or similar.

    A global, remote program where students contribute to open-source projects under mentorship, enhancing their programming skills while engaging with the open-source community.

- **[Google Season of Docs](https://developers.google.com/season-of-docs)** \
    A program that connects technical writers with open-source projects to improve documentation quality and accessibility.

- **[Outreachy](https://www.outreachy.org/)** \
    A diversity-focused program offering paid remote internships to individuals underrepresented in tech, providing opportunities to contribute to open-source software.

- **[Station1 Frontiers Fellowship](https://www.station1.org/sff)**  \
    A unique research and internship program designed for students in science and technology, promoting inclusive and socially impactful research.

- **[CompChemURG](https://www.bindingsites.co.uk/home)**  \
    A mentoring initiative focused on computational chemistry, supporting undergraduates and early-career researchers in gaining expertise in the field.

Many of our [core developers][] started through these programs &mdash; consider joining and becoming part of the MDAnalysis community!

### Upcoming Opportunities

> Applications for [Google Summer of Code 2025][] are open! If you're interested in participating, check out our project ideas and application guidelines.

Reviewer: agree - let's future proof most pages and reduce the number of places to check/update

For additional updates on upcoming events, visit our [Community]({{ site.baseurl }}/pages/community/) page.

### Past GSoC

> MDAnalysis has participated in Google Summer of Code for several years, mentoring students on a variety of open-source projects. Explore our past projects:

Author: I added this to the list of things to do in the future.

### API Reference
The [API reference]({{ site.docs.mdanalysis.url }}/stable/index.html) is **automatically generated** from *docstrings* in the codebase. It provides a structured reference for developers working with MDAnalysis. You can contribute by improving *docstrings* for functions, classes, and modules or updating outdated documentation.

#### How to Get Started
- Work on the [MDAnalysis Main Code Repository]({{ site.github.repo }}).
- Follow the [API Documentation Contribution Guide]({{ site.docs.userguide.url }}/stable/contributing_code.html#working-with-mdanalysis-docs).
- Browse open API documentation issues in [GitHub Issues]({{ site.github.issues }}).

## Mentoring & Outreach Programs
MDAnalysis has actively participated in various mentoring and outreach programs **to help students, researchers, and early-career contributors gain experience in open-source development and scientific software**. Through these programs, participants receive mentorship, contribute to real-world projects, and develop valuable skills in computational science and software engineering.

### Stay informed

> Stay informed about upcoming opportunities such as **Google Summer of Code, Outreachy, and other mentoring programs**. For the latest announcements, deadlines, and project ideas, check out our [blog]({{ site.baseurl }}/blog/) where we share updates on participation and application guidelines.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the latest announcements, deadlines, and project ideas, check out our [blog]({{ site.baseurl }}/blog/) where we share updates on participation and application guidelines.  
```

- **[CompChemURG](https://www.bindingsites.co.uk/home)**  \
    A mentoring initiative focused on computational chemistry, supporting undergraduates and early-career researchers in gaining expertise in the field.

Many of our [core developers]({{ site.baseurl }}/governance/#mdanalysis-core-developers) started through these programs &mdash; consider joining and becoming part of the MDAnalysis community!

### GSoC

MDAnalysis has participated in Google Summer of Code for several years, mentoring students on a variety of open-source projects. Explore our past projects:

- [GSoC 2025]({% post_url 2025-02-28-gsoc2025 %})
- [GSoC 2024]({% post_url 2024-02-27-gsoc2024 %})
- [GSoC 2023]({% post_url 2023-02-22-gsoc2023 %})
- [GSoC 2022]({% post_url 2022-03-07-gsoc2022 %})
- [GSoC 2021]({% post_url 2021-03-09-gsoc2021 %})
- [GSoC 2020]({% post_url 2020-02-22-gsoc2020 %})
- [GSoC 2019]({% post_url 2019-03-04-gsoc2019 %})
- [GSoC 2018]({% post_url 2018-02-14-gsoc2018 %})
- [GSoC 2017]({% post_url 2017-03-02-gsoc2017 %})
- [GSoC 2016]({% post_url 2016-04-26-gsoc %})

## Other Contributions

> If you are interested in contributing in other ways, such as improving the website or blog, you can refer to the [README file][] in the [Website Repository][]. While the website is already maintained by the MDAnalysis team, any fixes and updates are always welcome. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are interested in contributing in other ways, such as improving our website, you can refer to the [README file][] in the [Website Repository][]. While the website is already maintained by the MDAnalysis team, any fixes and updates are always welcome. 
```

> If you'd like to write a **blog post**, we welcome contributions that document your experience with MDAnalysis—whether it's learning the software, participating in a UGM, or working on a project. Feel free to reach out via the [Community]({{ site.baseurl }}/pages/community/) page for guidance on submitting a post.

Reviewer: can we promote (bump up) contributing to the blog (desired) and demote (put last) contributing to the website?

- Follow best practices, including
    - [Writing and Running Tests]({{ site.docs.userguide.url }}/stable/testing.html#testing) to ensure your changes work correctly.
    - [Updating the Documentation]({{ site.docs.userguide.url }}/stable/contributing_code.html#building-code-documentation) when making modifications.

## Contributing to MDAKits
[MDAKits]({{ site.mdakits.registry }}) are **community-driven projects** that extend MDAnalysis functionality. They allow researchers and developers to build tools tailored for specific workflows while staying within the MDAnalysis ecosystem.

### MDAKits Registry
The [MDAKits Registry]({{ site.mdakits.registry }}) lists active projects contributed by the community. These projects cover various applications, such as enhanced trajectory analysis, molecular simulations, and integration with machine learning frameworks.

### How to Get Started
- Explore existing MDAKits in the [MDAKits Registry]({{ site.mdakits.registry }}) to find projects that match your interests. Each entry includes functionality, installation instructions, and contribution guidelines.

> - Find open issues in [MDAKits GitHub Issues]({{ site.mdakits.issues }}).

Reviewer 2: Can you move this down the list as the last point? We are happy for people to contribute to the MDAKits infrastructure and overall maintenance, but this may ultimately be less important to most than contributing to a specific kit.

Author: Thanks @orbeckst. I am not sure I understand what I need to move here. Could you please clarify?

Reviewer 2: I meant to move this bullet point at the end of this list so that it is the last (and least important) one.

- Propose a new MDAKit by following the [MDAKits Guide]({{ site.mdakits.guide }}).
- Contribute to an existing MDAKit by collaborating with maintainers to improve functionality, fix bugs, or add new features.

MDAKits follow MDAnalysis coding standards but operate independently. Contributions to these projects are highly encouraged and help expand the MDAnalysis ecosystem.

## Contributing to the Documentation
Good documentation is essential to making MDAnalysis accessible to users and developers. MDAnalysis maintains two types of documentation: the [User Guide]({{ site.docs.userguide.url }}) and the [API Reference]({{ site.docs.mdanalysis.url }}/stable/index.html).

### User Guide
The [User Guide]({{ site.docs.userguide.url }}/stable/index.html) provides tutorials and explanatory content to help users install and learn MDAnalysis. You can contribute by updating unclear explanations, adding new tutorials or examples, or fixing outdated information. 

> ### How to Get Started

Reviewer 2: Should be a level 4 heading `####` because it belongs to the UG, right?

Reviewer 2: Or don't make it a heading.

- **[Outreachy](https://www.outreachy.org/)** \
    A diversity-focused program offering paid remote internships to individuals underrepresented in tech, providing opportunities to contribute to open-source software.

- **[Station1 Frontiers Fellowship](https://www.station1.org/sff)**  \
    A unique research and internship program designed for students in science and technology, promoting inclusive and socially impactful research.

- **[CompChemURG](https://www.bindingsites.co.uk/home)**  \
    A mentoring initiative focused on computational chemistry, supporting undergraduates and early-career researchers in gaining expertise in the field.

Many of our [core developers][] started through these programs &mdash; consider joining and becoming part of the MDAnalysis community!

### GSoC

MDAnalysis has participated in Google Summer of Code for several years, mentoring students on a variety of open-source projects. Explore our past projects:

- [GSoC 2025][] 
- [GSoC 2024][] 
- [GSoC 2023][] 
- [GSoC 2022][] 
- [GSoC 2021][] 
- [GSoC 2020][] 
- [GSoC 2019][] 
- [GSoC 2018][] 
- [GSoC 2017][] 
- [GSoC 2016][] 

## Other Contributions

> If you are interested in contributing in other ways, such as improving the website or blog, you can refer to the [README file][] in the [Website Repository][]. While the website is already maintained by the MDAnalysis team, minor fixes and updates are always welcome. 

Reviewer 2: I'd remove "minor" — any fixes are welcome :-)

[MDAnalysis Project]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/
[GitHub discussions]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/discussions
[core developers]: https://github.com/orgs/MDAnalysis/teams/coredevs/members
[Website Repository]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/MDAnalysis.github.io
[README file]: https://github.com/namiroues/MDAnalysis.github.io/blob/master/README.md
[GSoC 2025]: https://www.mdanalysis.org/2025/02/28/gsoc2025/
[GSoC 2024]: https://www.mdanalysis.org/2024/02/27/gsoc2024/
[GSoC 2023]: https://www.mdanalysis.org/2023/02/22/gsoc2023/
[GSoC 2022]: https://www.mdanalysis.org/2022/03/07/gsoc2022/
[GSoC 2021]: https://www.mdanalysis.org/2021/03/09/gsoc2021/
[GSoC 2020]: https://www.mdanalysis.org/2020/02/22/gsoc2020/
[GSoC 2019]: https://www.mdanalysis.org/2019/03/04/gsoc2019/
[GSoC 2018]: https://www.mdanalysis.org/2018/02/14/gsoc2018/
[GSoC 2017]: https://www.mdanalysis.org/2017/03/02/gsoc2017/

> [GSoC 2016]: https://www.mdanalysis.org/2016/04/26/gsoc/

Reviewer 2: These are all blog post so please use the `{% post_url FILENAME %}` tag to generate stable URLs (just `git grep post_url` to see examples).

---
layout: page
title: Contribute
order: 6
---

> MDAnalysis is an open-source project that welcomes contributions from the community. Whether you're a developer, documentation writer, or interested in improving the website, there are many ways to get involved.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
MDAnalysis is an open-source project that welcomes and encourages contributions from the community. Whether you're a developer, documentation writer, or interested in improving the website, there are many ways to get involved.
```
?

You can contribute by **developing new features, fixing bugs, improving documentation, enhancing tutorials, or engaging in discussions**. If you're new, you can start by participating in community conversations and mentoring programs. For more information on how you can participate, check out the [Community]({{ site.baseurl }}/pages/community/) and [Events]({{ site.baseurl }}/pages/events/) pages.

This page provides an overview of how you can contribute to the [Code](#contributing-to-the-code) or [Documentation](#contributing-to-documentation).

> MDAnalysis maintains **three GitHub repositories**, each dedicated to a specific area of contribution:

Reviewer 3: There are many more repositories we have in the MDAnalysis organisation. Maybe it's worth mentioning that, end then going on outlining the main ones as you did?

- [Main Code Repository]({{ site.github.repo }}): for code development and API documentation.

> - [User Guide Repository]({{ site.docs.userguide.repo }}): containing installation instructions, tutorials and learning resources.

Reviewer 2: This is too narrow. We have many other libraries where we would want help, MDAKits, etc. Can you rewrite to take that into account?

Singling out the MDAnalysis library is ok as this is the focus (see also mission). Mentioning the User Guide is good although you'd might want to make clear what kind of contributions would go there.

- [Website Repository][]: Hosts the website and blog.

> ---

Reviewer 2: Or if these should be separate pages, then make them separate pages.

> ## Contributing to the Code

Reviewer: codebase?

Reviewer 2: Which code base?  Make clear that there's the core library and many other projects under our GitHub org _and_ MDAKits by the community.

### User Guide

The [User Guide]({{ site.docs.userguide.url }}/stable/index.html) provides tutorials and explanatory content to help users install and learn MDAnalysis. You can contribute by updating unclear explanations or adding new tutorials or examples. 

To get started:
- Follow the [Contributing to the User Guide]({{ site.docs.userguide.url }}/stable/contributing_docs.html).
- Check for open documentation-related issues in the [User Guide GitHub Issues]({{ site.docs.userguide.issues }}).

### API Reference

The [API reference]({{ site.docs.mdanalysis.url }}/stable/index.html) is **automatically generated** from *docstrings* in the codebase and serves as a reference for developers. You can contribute by improving *docstrings* for functions, classes, and modules or updating outdated documentation.

To get started:
- Follow the [API Documentation Contribution Guide]({{ site.docs.userguide.url }}/stable/contributing_code.html#working-with-mdanalysis-docs).
- Browse open API documentation issues in [GitHub Issues]({{ site.github.issues }}).

> ---

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## Other Contributions

> If you are interested in contributing in other ways, such as improving the website or blog, you can refer to the [README file][] in the [Website Repository][]. While the website is already maintained by the MDAnalysis team, minor fixes and updates are always welcome. 

Reviewer 2: Mentioning the website here is ok, just no need to advertise it at the same level as core library, user guide, other projects, and MDAKits.
